Title: 2603.19042v2.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.19042v2

Published Time: Fri, 27 Mar 2026 00:53:06 GMT

Number of Pages: 22

Markdown Content:
Man and Machine: Artificial Intelligence and 

# Judicial Decision Making 

Abstract 

The integration of artificial intelligence (AI) technologies into judicial decision -

makin g – particularly in pretrial, sentencing, and parole contexts  – has generated 

substantial concerns about transparency, reliability, and accountability. At the 

same time, these developments have brought the limitations of human judgment 

into sharper relief and underscored the importance of understanding how judges 

inter act with AI -based decision aids. Using criminal justice risk assessment as a 

focal case,  we  conduct a  synthetic  review  connecting three intertwine d aspects 

of AI’s role in judicial decision -making: the performance and fairness of AI tools, 

the strengths an d biases of human judges, and the nature of AI -plus -Human 

interactions.  Across the fields of computer science, economics, law,  criminology 

and psychology, researchers have made significant progress in evaluating the 

predictive validity of automated risk assessment instruments, documenting 

biases  in judicial decision -making, and , to a more limited extent , examining how 

judges use algorithmic recommendations.  While  the existing  empirical evidence 

indicat es that the impact of AI decision aid tool s on pretrial and sentencing 

decisions is modest or  nonexistent , o ur review  also  reveals important gaps in the 

existing literature.  Further research is needed  to  evaluate the performance of AI 

risk assessment instruments , understand how judges navigate noisy decision 

making environments and how individual characteristics influence judges’ 

responses to AI advice . We argue that  AI -ver sus-Human comparisons have the 

potential to yield new insights into both algorithmic tools and human decision -

makers . We  advocate  greater interdisciplinary integration  to foster  cross -

fertilization in future  research .

Arthur Dyevre  (corresponding author) 

Leuven Centre for Empirical Jurisprudence 

artdyevre@gmail.com 

Ahmad Shahvaroughi 

Leuven Centre for Empirical Jurisprudence 

Leuven Labor atory  for Experimental Social Psychology 

ahmad.shahvaroughi@kuleuven.be 1.  Introduction 

In recent years, artificial intelligence (AI) 

technologies have been introduced into 

criminal  and civil  justice to assist with 

decisions such as pretrial release, 

sentencing, and parole. Predictive tools 

(e.g. risk assessment algorithms) and 

sentencing support systems are being 

used , piloted  or debated  in various 

jurisdictions  with the promise of 

improving consistency and reducing 

human error or bias  (Niblett, 2024; Salo 

et al., 2019; Stephen Wormith & Bonta, 

2018; Fazel et al., 2022) . In the United 

States,  risk assessment  instruments  like 

the COMPAS algorithm or the Public 

Safety Assessment (PSA) are designed to 

predict a defendant’s likelihood of 

reoffending or skipping court, informing 

judges’ bail  and  sentencing decisions .

While the core premise  is  that  AI 

technologies  might augment or 

outperform human judgment , it is 

established that  AI  decision support 

systems  can  be inaccurate , and 

reproduce  or  even amplify biases 

present in the data or design . Critics  of 

“algorithmic justice” frequently  take 

COMPAS as  a case in point,  after  studies 

alleg ed  discriminat ion  towards  black 

defendants  (Engel et al., 2025; Gursoy & 

Kakadiaris, 2022) .

As a rguments in support of AI hinge, 

implicitly  or explicitly , on comparisons 

between  AI and  decision making  by 

humans alone, the discussion inevitabl y

brings questions about the strengths and 

limitations of  human judges into sharper 

focus.  While human judges possess the 

ability to process case -specific, 

unexpected information  in way s that  are 

hard to match for any automated 

system, a substantial empirical 

literature  shows that  even professional, 

experienced judges  are  susceptible  to 

cognitive biases , inconsistencies  and 

extraneous influences that can  cause 

significant departures from the 

normative ideal of rational, impartial and 

independent decision making 

(Rachlinski & Wistrich, 2017) . Th ough 

both are constrained, value -laden, and 

difficult to align with plural legal norms ,

algorithmic systems can sometimes be 

adjusted more transparently and 

iteratively than human decision 

processes  – machine learning models 

can be retrained, tweaked and 

redesigned  indefinitely .

Discussions about the deployment of AI 

technologies in the judicial context often 

conjure the dream or nightmare of  “robot 

judges”  (Niblett, 2024) . In practice, 

however, AI technologies are not 

deployed to replace human judges but to 

assist them.  Their  actual  impact, 

therefore, depends on human -machine 

interaction s. Along with the limitations 

of AI systems and the biases of human 

judges, t his makes u nderstanding  how 

and when  human judges  selectively  trust 

or ignore AI  recommendations  a new  and 

crucial  area of research. 

This paper addresses these issues 

through a synthetic  review  of the 

interdisciplinary literatures on AI in 

judicial decision -making, with a

particular focus on predictive, data -

driven risk assessment tools in criminal 

justice.  We  connect and  synthesize 

research  across law, computer science, 

economics,  criminology  and psychology 

to illuminate three closely related 

dimensions of AI’s role in judicial 

decision -making: (i) the performance 

and fairness of AI -based risk assessment 

instruments, (ii) the strengths and 

limitations of human judges, and (iii) the 

nature of AI –human interactions in 

practice.  While  tak ing  stock of existing 

research,  we  flag gaps in the research and provide guidance for futu re 

empirical work. 

Our discussion centres on  predictive ,

data -driven  risk assessment  in criminal 

justice , which we use  as a  focal case .

Not  all AI  applications  with the potential 

to serve as decision aid  are  powered by 

data -driven methods . Bayesian 

networks,  a method  proposed  for the 

evaluation of complex evidence , for 

example, is  a purely  sym bolic, logic -

based approach  (Vlek et al., 2016) .

However, c ontroversies have focused on 

data -driven  applications  as these 

capture  broader  concerns  about AI use 

in public decision making . AI methods 

have been deployed or are actively being 

developed to support or automate other 

judicial tasks such as case triage, 

information retrieval, legal document 

summarization, transcription of hearings 

and document assembly. 1 Yet  predictive 

risk assessment in criminal justice 

counts among  the best testing ground s

to compare AI and human  judgment .

Spe lling out p recise c riteria  to evaluate 

the quality  of  judicial opinions  or the 

correctness of damage awards  is 

difficult . Crime and  incar ceration rates ,

by contrast , provide clear outcomes by 

wh ich to assess  decisions .

Our choice of a  sy nthetic  review  over  a

systematic review or  a meta -analysis  is 

motivated by  the  broa d scope  of our 

tripartite analysis  of algorithmic 

performance,  human  judgment, and  AI -

plus -Human  interaction  covering 

literatures in mul tiple disciplines . The 

strands of  literature  we canvass differ 

considerably in their research 

objectives , theoretical assumptions and 

empirical methodolog ie s.  Such breadth      

> 1CEPEJ’s Resource Center on Cyberjustice and
> AI reports AI deployment tools across Council of
> Europe countries along with the United States,
> Brazil, China and Columbia:

and  meth odological  hetero geneity  make 

quantit ative meta -analysis  impossible or 

meaningless . We hope , however, that 

our  efforts  will facilitate  future  review 

work  on specific aspects  of the 

discussion  while  foster ing  more 

integrated  perspectives  reflect ing 

advances with regard to the 

technological , methodological  and 

behavioural dimensions  of the problem .

Across the fields of computer science, 

economics, law, criminology and 

psychology, researchers have made 

significant progress in evaluating the 

predictive validity of automated risk 

assessment instruments,  documenting 

systematic patterns in judicial decision -

making, and , to a more limited extent ,

examining how judges use algorithmic 

recommendations.  The available 

evidence indicates that risk assessment 

instruments vary in accuracy and, 

overall, have little impact on actual 

decision outcomes. But our review 

reveals important gaps in existing  bodies 

of  literature . Further research is needed 

to evaluate the performance  of  risk 

assessment tools  and compare  them  to 

human decision making . More  work  is 

needed  to understand how  judges 

navigate noisy decision making 

environments  and  how  individual 

characteristics  influence  judges’ 

responses to AI advice.  As research on 

AI -versus -Human  comparisons  and  AI -

plus -Human  interactions shows, a

broader and more integrated 

perspective, connecting 

interdisciplinary  subfields operating 

under  di stinct  goals and methodological 

assumptions, promises  to yield new   

> https://www.coe.int/en/web/cepej/resource -
> centre -on -cyberjustice -and -
> ai#{%22202452374%22:[4]} .(Accessed 2
> January 2026).

insights into both algorithmic tools and 

human  judges. 

The paper is organised as follows.  We 

first clarify the kinds of AI systems at 

stake . W e then examine the evidence on 

their predictive performance and 

fairness . N ext we review evidence on 

human judicial judgment as the relevant 

comparative baseline . F inally, we assess 

evidence on AI -versu s-human and AI -

plus -Human performance and derive a 

research agenda. 

2.  AI  Risk Assessment  Tools 

This Section  examines  the technology 

underpinning  automated  risk 

assessment instruments . Specifically, 

we con sider  to  performance , accuracy ,

data  and  fairness .

2.1.  Basic  Typology of AI 

Techniques 

AI is an umbrella term for a

heterogeneous set of  techniques  that 

differ markedly in their assumptions, 

representations, and modes of 

inference. These differences matter 

because they  bear  on issues  of 

reliability , performance  and 

transparency .

“Algorithm ” is  a similarly capacious 

term . An algorithm is  simply  a sequential 

set of steps and operations . And, in that 

sense, the  circuitry of  a hand calculator 

is just as much an algorithm  as a deep 

neural network. 

A first family  of  AI  techniques comes 

under the heading  “symbolic AI ” or 

“expert systems ”. These techniques 

predate  the  machine learning  methods 

that have spurred the recent AI boom and 

are  based on explicit representations of 

knowledge, rules, and logical 

relationships. Symbolic systems reason 

by manipulating symbols according to 

formal rules or argumentation 

frameworks  that embody expert 

knowledge . Their key advantage s are 

interpretability  and  reliability . When 

correctly designed and with valid input, 

the y will always generate valid answers  –

very much like the circuitry of a hand 

calculator. All  reasoning steps can, in 

principle, be inspected, explained, and 

challenged.  Symbolic AI  systems  require 

substantial human effort to encode 

expert  knowledge  and  struggle with 

uncertainty, noise, and the variability of 

real -world  input data . These  limitations 

and the associated knowledge 

acquisition bottleneck  have constrained 

their deployment  (Ashley, 2017) .

From image and voice recognition to 

translation and text generation , the most 

salient  AI advances of the last twenty 

years  tied to  machine learning  methods 

which form a second family of AI 

techniques  based on statistical learning 

and optimization.  Here data are the 

starting point.  Machine learning models 

infer patterns  from  their  (preferably) 

large  training data  by adjusting model 

parameters to minimize predictive  or 

classification  error . This is  typically 

accomplished  without explicit 

representations of domain knowledge or 

causal structure.  An important 

distinction  is between supervised ,

unsupervised  and self -supervised 

learning.  Supervised learning relies on 

labelled training data, where each input 

(e.g. characteristics of paroled offender) 

is paired with a known outcome (e.g., 

recidivism/no recidivism), which the 

model learns to predict by first fitting 

many parameter values and  then 

selecting the best performing using 

separate validation data.  Unsupervised 

learning, by contrast, is typically 

exploratory and less directly tied to decision -making outcomes . It  uses 

unlabelled data and seeks to discover 

structure s or patterns  – such as clusters 

or latent dimensions  – based on  data 

without predefined targets. Self -

supervision  – which , among other things, 

is used to train Large Language Models 

(LLMs)  – operates without human -

labelled data but with a clear  predefined 

target (e.g. predict the next word). 

Machine learning methods bear some 

resemblance to classical statistical 

modelling techniques . Statistic al 

modelling  also involve s data and 

empirically adjusted parameters.  But 

aim s and assumptions  diffe r. Statistical 

modelling typically aims to  quantify 

uncertainty , often using mathematically 

explicit assumptions about data -

generating processes  and emphasising 

hypothesis -testin g and causal 

identification.  Machine learning  models ,

by contrast,  do not aim to estimate 

causal effects  but to minimize  the  out -of -

sample  error rate of their predictions  or 

classifications .

2.2.  Risk Assessment 

Instruments  in  the Justice 

System : Actu arial vs 

Machine Learning 

Despite the prominence of COMPAS and 

other risk assessment instruments in 

discussions about  AI and  algorithmic 

fairness  (Hellman, 2025) , most  of the 

decision aid  tools  currently in use  appear 

to be built around techniques  and 

assumptions  developed more than half a 

century ago.  Equivant (formerly 

Northpointe ), the  private, for -profit -

corporation  delivering COMPAS, 

provides limited documentation on its           

> 2See Risk Assessment Fact Sheet on the
> Stanford Law School website:
> https://law.stanford.edu/pretrial -risk -

inner workings  (Rudin et al., 2020) . But 

studies attempting to reconstruct its 

methodology indicate a linear structure 

approximating a linear additive 

regression model  (Dressel & Farid, 

2018) . Similarly, the weights assigned to 

the nine factors used to construct the 

PSA risk score appear to have been 

estimated using logistic regression, with 

odds ratio s rounded to the nearest 

integer to ease scoring. 2

Both PSA and COMPAS bear similarities 

to the Level of  Service -Revised  (LSI -R), 

one of the most widely used  risk 

assessment  instrument s worldwide  for 

sentencing and probation  (Stephen 

Wormith & Bonta, 2018) . Introduced in 

the 1990s, LSI -R builds on decades of 

research in psychology and criminology .

Impo rtantly, it was developed outside 

machine learning or symbolic AI 

paradigms and, instead, presented as  a

systematic, actuarial alternative to 

clinical assessment  (Kehl & Kessler, 

2017) .

Based on random forest  (Breiman, 2001) ,

a decision aid system  used by the 

Pennsylvania Board of Probation and 

Parole  to inform parole decisions  and 

described in  Berk  (2017)  represents a 

rare real -world application of  advanced ,

supervised  machine learnin g in the field 

of crime risk assessment .

Because m achine learning  techniques 

have been developed  with out -of -sample 

prediction as the ir  primary goal, they are 

generally presumed  to outperf orm 

simple linear model s. Some studies do 

support this expectation.  Trained on a 

dataset compiling hundreds of 

thousands of bail decisions , the  gradient 

> assessment -tools -factsheet -project/ . (Accessed
> 18 December 2025.)

boosted trees  showcased by  Kleinberg et 

al.  (2018)  predict failure to appear 

considerably better  than a linear model 

using the same features (characteristics 

of the current case, prior criminal record, 

age) . Of the 1% of arrestees predicted to 

be most at risk of  jumping bail  before 

court by this complex model, 56% do fail 

to show up as mandated. By contrast, 

those predicted to be in the top 1% of the 

risk distribution by a standard, linear 

additive logistic regression model, only 

fail to appear in 46% of cases. Gradient 

boost ed trees outperform standard 

linear regression over the re st of the 

predicted risk distribution , although by 

smaller margins  (Kleinberg et al., 2018) .

Gains  from machine learning method s,

however,  depend on the presence of 

non linear patterns  in  the  data . Unlike 

audio, video or  textual data , the dat a

used to  develop and train risk 

assessment models  are  typically low 

dimensional , limited to a small set of 

predictive features (age, crime history, 

pending charges) . They are also  far less 

likely to contain non -linear relationships. 

Extant  comparative  studies reveal a

mixed record, with machine learning 

methods often barely improving on 

additive  logistic  regression  models 

(Duwe & Kim, 2017; Ghasemi et al., 2021; 

Jung et al., 2017; Rudin et al., 2020) .

Moreover,  gains  from machine learning ,

large or small,  ordinarily  come at the 

expense of interpretability . Kleinberg et. 

al. (2018)’s  gradient boosted trees 

algorithm builds multiple decision trees 

sequentially , where each new tree 

focuses on correcting the errors made by 

the previous trees , resulting in a complex 

model where the final prediction is 

essentially the  average of its multiple 

trees.  The  aforementioned  random 

forest  algorithm used by the 

Pennsylvania Board of Probation and 

Parole operates  on similar principles. 

Like  neural networks  and other 

ensemble methods  combi ni ng multiple 

machine learning techniques , such 

highly complex , non -linear  model s are 

effectively black box es .

Where the  predictive gains  from more 

complex machine learning models over 

simpler, more interpretable  models are 

small, operators may prefer to trade 

these  for better interpretability  and 

simplicity  (Stevenson & Doleac, 2024) .

Rigorous  empirical  assessments  are rare 

and  more research is needed  to 

systematically compare  machine 

learning and actuarial  techniques across 

data types and contexts to  determine 

where, when and to what extent the 

choice of methods may affect predictive 

performance .

2.3.  Accuracy  and Performance 

Metrics 

Even with good data,  prediction systems 

are never error -free . They produce 

misclassifications  – false positives and 

false negatives  – at rates that reflect their 

predictive accuracy. 

Simply defined as the proportion of 

correct predictions, accuracy is a coarse 

and often misleading performance 

metric. For example, if less than 5% of 

arrestees do actually re cidivate, a model 

that would never predict reoffence would 

actually be accurate more than 95% of 

the time. Moreover, the raw output of a 

predictive model is a probability  – e.g. a 

65% probability that a given arrestee will 

reoffend. But for deployment and 

evaluation purposes, this  numerical 

value  must be converted into  categories: 

predicted positive /negative  (will reoffend /not reoffend ) or high/low risk .3

Determining  the  threshold for 

assignment  to a category  is not an 

innocuous question . Should a 45% 

chance of recidivism be considered a 

predicted positive?  A 20 % risk ? Should a 

35% risk of re cidivism be cla ssified as 

high risk? Should the same  threshold 

apply for all  categories of crimes  or 

should a  lower threshold  apply  for violent 

crimes ?

The choice of threshold  directly impact s

true and false positive rates.  A lower 

threshold will result in a higher false 

positive rate. A higher threshold will 

result in fewer false positive s but will 

likely  miss more  true positives.  For  real -

world applications, t he selection of a 

specific  threshold is a normative rather 

than an empirical matter (see  discussion 

of the  leniency/incarceration trade -off in 

Section 3.1.) .

For that reason, a  widely used metric to 

assess  and compare the performance of 

predictive  models is the area under the 

curve (AUC) . Unlike confusion matrices 

and many other performance metrics, 

such as precision  and  specificity, it does 

not assume a given threshold, but, 

instead,  measures how well a model can 

di stinguish between true and false 

positives across all possible thresholds. 

An AUC score of 0.5 indicates 

performance no better than a random 

guess whereas an AUC score of 1

reflects perfect predicti on across all 

thresholds. 

For their gradient boosted trees train ed 

to predict failure to appear before court ,

Kleinberg et al. (2018) report AUC = 0.71. 

A systematic review of  research articles 

assessing the predictive validity of  six     

> 3For an accessible , thorough discussion of this
> issue see Lagioia et al. (2023) .

pretrial risk assessment tools , including 

PSA and COMPAS,  found AUC values 

ran ging from 0.64 to 0.73  (Desmarais et 

al., 2021) . Ano ther  systematic review 

looking at  nine  distinct  risk assessment 

instruments  used in sentencing  report ed 

AUC scores  ranging from  AUC = 0.42 to 

AUC = 0. 82, and  AUC = 0.57 to  AUC= 0.75 

for studies with sample size N > 500 

(Fazel et al.  2022) .

Another important, threshold -

independent  performance  metric is 

calibration, which measures how well 

expected probabilities compare to  true 

outcome  frequencies. If a model is well -

calibrated, released convicts for which 

the model predict s a 10% probability of 

recidivism should recidivate , on average ,

close to 10% of the time.  Kleinberg et al. 

(2018) ’s machine learning algorithm 

performs well on that metric. 

Defendants predicted to have 40% 

probability of failing to appear, fail to 

appear  appro ximately  40% of the time. 

Unfortunately, very few predictive 

validation studies report calibration 

metrics such as Expected Calibration 

Error  (Fazel et al., 2022) . Reporting Brier 

and log loss scores, which capture both 

calibration and the sharpness of 

predictions, would  also  facilitate 

comparisons with human predictions 

and normative expectations  (Hernández -

Orallo et al., 2012; Himmelstein et al., 

2021; Lin et al., 2020) .

2.4.  Fairness 

As with human decision makers, 

misclassifications, mispredictions ,

alone,  do not make a n AI  system per se 

“biased”.  Instead, it  is  when 

misclassifications  vary  significantly 

across categories , e.g.  men and women, white and black defendants , that  a

system can  in some  meaningful  sense  be 

characterized as  bias ed  or unfair .4

As is well documented,  biases  in data -

driven AI systems  may  stem from  biases 

embedded in the historic training data, 

measurement error  or data with 

underrepresented groups or categories. 

Historical criminal justice data reflect 

pre -existing societal and  institutional 

biases.  Remedying these sources of bias 

is rendered difficult by correlations 

between seemingly innocuous 

characteristics  – e.g. ZIP code, age  – and 

sensitive, protected  traits such as 

ethnicity,  gender  or sexual orientation .

Risk assessment  instruments  do not use 

race , gender  or sexual orientation  as 

predictor. However,  they typically use 

age , which  has been shown to correlate 

with race in US criminal data, as black 

defendants tend to be younger than 

white defendants  (Engel et al., 2025; 

Rudin et al., 2020) . Conversely,  it has 

been shown that ignoring gender can be 

detrimental to  women, as treating 

female conv icts like male convicts  may 

result  in overprediction of  women’s 

likelihood of recidivism  (Skeem et al., 

2016) 

There exist v arious  strategies to address 

biases in  data -driven  AI applications. 

One is via data curation and 

preprocessing  to remove correlations 

with sensitive characteristics  (Kamiran & 

Calders, 2012) . Another is by adding 

constraints to the optimization objective 

at the training stage  (Kleinberg et al., 

2018; Zafar et al., 2017) . Yet another is to 

correct results at the postprocessing 

stage  (Hardt et al., 2016) .           

> 4The notion of bias relates to comparative
> conceptions of algorithmic fairness .Some
> conceptions of algorithmic fairness, though, go

The controversy surrounding COMPAS 

has sparked the development of formal 

measures of fairness against which 

models can be trained and 

benchmarked.  These efforts  have  shown 

that, except  in highly unusual 

circumstances  where groups exhibit the 

base rate (e.g. for recidivism) , a  model 

cannot  simultaneously satis fy every 

measure of fairness  (Hellman,  2025; 

Lagioia et al., 2023) . For example , it is 

mathematically impossible for  a model 

sim ultaneously to  satisfy  predictive 

parity  (those predicted to recidivate 

recidivate  with the same frequency 

across groups ) and  equalized odds 

(same true positive and  false positive 

rates across groups). 

A systematic review of 11 studies found 

the predictive validity of pretrial 

assessment tools to be generally 

comparable  across racial and ethnic 

subgroups , but with  three  studies 

reporting  lower predictive validity for 

defendants of colour  (Desmarais et al., 

2021) .

2.5.  Summary 

Existing or proposed risk  assessment 

instruments do possess predictive 

power. B eyond demonstrating this fact, 

though, the existing literature in this area 

reveals significant limitations.  There is 

limited evidence to establish which 

instruments and data -driven techniques 

offer the  most reliable  predictions  (Fazel 

et al., 2022) . Studies rarely discuss 

potential distortions arising from the 

data generation process, such as 

sampling bias  (Goel et al., 2021) . Aside 

from affecting model training, 

measurement error  may  impact 

evaluation and  comparability . As with       

> beyond comparative treatment and even
> misclassification, see Hellman, (2025) .

training, e valuating the accuracy of a risk 

assessment  instrument  presupposes 

data providing a valid ground truth , in 

particular  a valid measure of the 

outcome  variable . In predictive validity 

studies, recidivism,  for instance , is 

typically measured as re -arrest or as new 

conviction  (Fazel et al., 2022) . Yet  even 

with  full access to court and police 

records,  many  crimes  may remain 

un reported.  Local and/or time and -

varying factors  (e.g. resources allocated 

to law enforcement) may also impact the 

discrepancy between recorded crimes 

and the real crime rate.  To overcome this 

label bias, future research might focus 

on crim inal offenses  that  are  more likely 

to be accurately reported , such as 

failure -to -appear or failure to comply 

with parole conditions. 

This said , it bears emphasis that 

demonstrating pre dictive power and 

reasonable fairness , al though essent ial, 

does  not  in itself  constitute  evidence 

that decision aid tools compare , let 

alone, outperform human decision 

makers , as the following sections will 

make clear. 

3.  Strengths and Limitations of 

Human Judges 

A vast body of  research in psychology ,

economics, law and political science 

offers broad evidence  that  jurors and 

professional judges  are susceptible to 

extraneous influences as well as to 

cognitive  and racial  biases . This 

evidence  provides a n essential, albeit 

incomplete,  human  baseline  to 

understand  how  AI tools might  impact 

judicial decisions. 

3.1.  Cognitive Biases 

Controlled vignette experiments with 

professional magistrates  and lay jurors 

have reported evidence of the following 

cognitive biases:  

> •

Confirmation bias : giving more 

weight to information that 

confirms preconceived notions 

while  discounting disconfirming 

evidence  (Kukucka & Kassin, 

2014; O’Brien, 2009; Wistrich & 

Rachlinski, 2012) . 

> •

Anchoring bias  and contrast 

effect : being influenced by 

irrelevant or  initial numerical 

values or recommendations  such 

as irrationally high damage 

claims, sentence 

recommendation by a probation 

officer or the sentence imposed in 

the preceding case 

(Bystranowski et al., 2021; 

Englich et al., 2006; Rachlinski et 

al., 2012, 2015) . 

> •

Framing effect s: responding 

differently to the same choice 

(e.g. settlement offer)  when 

presented as loss  rather than  gain 

(Guthrie et al., 2000; Rachlinski & 

Wistrich, 2017) . 

> •

Hindsight bias:  perceiving  an 

event as more likely in retrospect 

than it was prior to  its  occurrence ,

notably when establishing 

negligence  (Casper et al., 1989; 

Fessel & Roese, 2011; Guthrie et 

al., 2000; Harley, 2007) . 

> •

Gender bias: benevolent sexism 

in  child custody and criminal 

cases  (Rachlinski & Wistrich, 

2021) . 

> •

Base -rate fallacy:  ignoring the 

general prevalence of an event  in 

favour of individuating evidence 

(Guthrie et al., 2000) . 

> •

Out -group  bias : treating 

members of other racial, religious 

or ethnic groups less favourably 

than members of one’s own group (Levinson et al., 2017; Rachlinski 

et al., 2008, 2015) .

Observational , archival  studies 

exploiting random or quasi -random 

case /juror  assignment , complement 

these findings. The y report  evidence 

consistent with the existence of  out -

group bias  (Choi et al., 2022; Ash et al., 

2025; Abrams et al., 2012) , benevolent 

sexism  (Bontrager et al., 2013; Philippe, 

2020; Starr, 2015)  and anchoring effects 

(Bushway et al., 2012) . Studies of asylum 

and immigration cases have revealed 

extreme variations  among judges 

despite  random case  assignment 

(Hangartner et al., 2025; Ramji -Nogales 

et al., 2007) , while  sequential negative 

auto -correlation  in decision patterns 

suggest s that  judges  occasionally 

commit the gambler’s fallacy  (Chen et 

al., 2016) .

3.2.  Simplified Judgment 

Heuristics 

A more limited body of studies indicate 

that , when required to assess multiple 

factors or sources of information,  judges 

often  adopt simplified cognitive 

strategies.  Although judges claim to 

consider a wide array of factors 

(including pending charges, criminal 

history, employment, local ties)  when 

setting bail, they appear  to rely almost 

exclusively on prosecutorial 

recommendations  (Ebbesen & Konecni, 

1975) . Dhami & Ayton (2001)  show that 

the bail decisions of judges  in their 

experimental setup  are  best predicted by 

a simple, noncompensatory  heuristic 

rule . A heuristic  rule  using only two 

factors provided the best fit for 75.5% of 

participants.  Dhami (2003)  replicated 

this finding using observational data 

from two British courts.  Outside criminal 

law , Beebe (2006)  finds that  although US 

federal courts claim to apply  multifactor 

tests  incorporating  up to thirteen  factors 

when assessing consumer confusion in 

trademark  infringement  cases judges 

appear to use only two  (similarity of the 

marks and proximity of the goods). 

Similar patterns have been found in US 

copyright fair use disputes  (Beebe, 2007, 

2020)  and regarding awards of attorney’s 

fees  in class actions  (Eisenberg & Miller, 

2004) , where judges claim to weigh 

multiple factors, most of which do not 

have any effects on  outcomes. 

3.3.  Ideological Attitudes 

Empirical research has demonstrated 

that human judges can be  heavily 

influenced  by their ideological attitudes 

(Bonica & Sen, 2021; Cohen & Yang, 

2019; Dyevre & Rodilla Lazaro, 2025; 

Epstein et al., 2013; Hangartner et al., 

2025; Pinello, 1999; Ramji -Nogales et 

al., 2007; Sunstein et al., 2007) . When 

induced by judicial ideology, v ariations in 

sentencing severity , bail or parole 

decisions , are not necessarily 

synonymous with bias in the sense of 

departure from rationality . Indeed, such 

decisions present judges with an 

unavoidable trade -off.  Jailing defendants 

tends to  reduce crime ; r eleasing more 

defendants  to  increase crime .

Ideological differences over leniency and 

severity can thus be interpreted as 

preference for one type of error over 

an other:  less lenient , typically 

conservative judges prioritize a low  false 

negative  rate (ensuring they don’t 

release people who might commit 

crimes)  at the co st of  a higher false 

positive rate  (jailing  people who won’t 

commit crimes ); more lenient, 

progressive judges pr ioritise a lower 

false positive rate at the cost of a higher 

false negative rate.  Both experimental 

and observational  evidence, though, show s that ideology can trigger 

motivated reason ing , distorting  the 

evaluation of evidence or  assessments 

regarding the scope and relevance of 

precedents  (Braman & Nelson, 2007; Lu 

& Chen, 2025) .

3.4.  External Pressures 

Whereas some external constraints , e.g. 

the pressure to anticipate appeals,  can 

be  viewed  as part of a legitimate process 

of judicial accountability, other sources 

of external pressure are more 

problematic.  Observational studies 

suggest that workload pressures can 

have a non -trivial effect on judicial 

decision making  and, besides delays, 

affect decision quality  (Ash & MacLeod, 

2015; Huang, 2010; Shumway & Wilson, 

2022) . There is a robust association 

between workload shocks caused by 

reduction in judicial personnel or 

dramatic shifts in litigation volume and 

case dispositions that require less time 

and resources, such as affirming lower 

court decisions  (Huang, 2010) . Similarly, 

facing a contested election or 

institutional reforms affecting caseload 

and time pressure, e.g. the introduction 

of intermediate appellate courts, appear 

to affect the quality of judicial opinions, 

as measured by word length, discussed 

and dis tinguishing citations  (Ash &

MacLeod, 2015) .

3.5.  Summary 

The picture of human judicial decision 

making that has emerged from decades 

of empirical research  on judicial 

behaviour is useful to get a  preliminary 

sense  of how AI tools might potentially 

ameliorate or deteriorate  the quality of 

judicial decisions. 

Human judges  largely rely  on intuitive 

reasoning.  Facing factor overload, 

research suggests,  they adopt simplified 

decision rules.  Rules of thumb  do  not 

automatically result in bad decisions. 

“Fast and frugal heuristics ” often prove 

impressively  and surprisingly  accurate 

(Gigerenzer et al., 2000) . But  biases are 

the  flipside  of heuristics. When 

important information is ignored, 

heuristics  turn into  biases,  resulting in 

erroneous judgments  (Kahneman, 2011; 

Rachlinski & Wistrich, 2017) . Moreover, 

under conditions of time pressure, 

human decision makers are more 

inclined to rely on heuristics  which 

requir e less  information search and 

cognitive processing  (Rieskamp &

Hoffrage, 1999) . Accordingly, w e should 

expect  higher  workload and other 

sources of stressful pressure to  increase 

reliance  on  intuitive thinking  in human 

judges , raising the likelihood  of judicial 

error .

It is important to be clear about the 

current limitations of research on human 

judges.  Judges operate  in a noisy 

informational environment . They receive 

a mult itude  of  signal s and cues  whether 

from  briefs, pleadings , reports  or  the 

appearance, looks, verbal and non -

verbal demeanour of defendants, 

prosecutors and attorneys.  How and 

what  cues  judges pick from this 

mountain of information,  whether these 

cues constitute informative signals or 

noise and  how individual judges differ in 

the  cues  they pick, though, is still 

imperfectly understood.  This literature  is 

also a long way from  provi ding  a reliable 

basis to estimate  the incidence of 

erroneous decisions. Even  judges’  actual 

forecasting skills  with regard to 

recidivism has attract ed litt le research. 

As we shall see,  AI -versus -Human  and 

AI -plus -Human  research  are  spur ring 

renewed efforts  to investigate these aspects of human judicial decision 

making. 

4.  Human  vs  Machine 

Comparisons 

Rigorous  AI -versus -Human  comparisons 

are necessary to determine whether AI 

tools have  real practical potential. But 

simulations  – comparing human 

decisions to what an AI system would 

have  decided  – can also  serve to 

illuminate  human judicial  behaviour .

4.1.  Methodological Approaches 

Much of the research comparing 

automated risk assessment tools to 

human decision makers consists of lab 

experiments with  lay human participants 

recruited via crowdsourcing platforms 

(Biswas et al., 2020; Dressel & Farid, 

2018; Lin et al., 2020) . Human 

participants are presented with a

vignette including the same information 

(age, criminal history ) fed to the 

algorithm and receive a monetary reward 

reflecting the quality of their predictions 

(based on Brier scores). 

Observational studies promise to 

compare algorithms to professional 

judges  operating in real -world 

conditions . However, making valid 

comparisons  using observational data 

poses serious methodological 

challenges.  First,  besides future criminal 

behaviour , a decision may require other 

considerations. Sentencing decisions 

typically consider  other factors, such as 

retribution , deterrence or remorse .

Without accounting for these 

unobserved factors, simply juxtaposing 

recidivism rates to what they would have 

been had the AI -generated 

recommendation been followed, 

therefore, would not  result in  a valid  AI -

versus -Human  comparison.  This 

problem is  known as the  omitted payoff 

problem. 

Another challenge is the  selective label 

problem . Crime outcomes can only be 

observed for released convicts and 

defendants. Whether jailed defendants 

would have committed a crime had they 

been released , by definition,  cannot be 

observed . Released defendants and 

convicts do not represent a random 

sample of the defendant population 

(Lakkaraju et al., 2017) . To simulate 

recidivism  under the  diversion 

recommendations  of a risk  assessment 

instrument  for sentencing  introduced in 

Virginia in 2003,  Stevenson & Doleac 

(2024)  impute detainees the post -

release  recidivism  rate of individuals 

with the same risk score, which , as  the 

authors admit , ignores systematic 

differences between jailed and released 

convicts .

To  mitigate th ese problems , Kleinberg et 

al.  (2018)  exploit  the fact that cases in 

their data are randomly assigned to 

judges who differ in leniency  along with 

the narrow scope of pretrial bail 

decisions, where the law  dictates to 

consider  only the risk of flight or rearrest. 

Ben -Michael et al.  (2025)  consider a 

setting where pretrial judges can only 

impose a s ignature bond  (release on own 

recognizance) , a small cash bond  or a 

large cash bond .

4.2.  Empirical Findings 

Lab  studies report mixed finding s. W ith 

regard to  both  predictive accuracy 

(Dressel & Farid, 2018; Lin et al., 2020) 

and fairness  (Biswas et al., 2020; Dressel 

& Farid, 2018)  human predictions 

sometimes match, sometimes 

underperform algorithmic predictions 

(with COMPAS  or an additive, logistic 

regression model  usually  offered  as AI 

benchmark) . The relatively good performance of  lay  human forecasters  in 

Dressel & Farid  (2018)  is  likely an  artefact 

of study design.  Participants  received 

immediate  feedback on the accuracy of 

their predictions . Studies that did not 

provide immediate feedback reported 

considerably poorer human  accuracy 

(Biswas et al., 2020; Lin et al., 2020) .

Another  limitation  of  existing  lab studies 

is  that  human participants are only 

treated  with  informational inputs that are 

consistent across cases  and relevant to 

risk assessment. As  Goel et al.  (2021) 

point out, such “boosted” human 

predictions are far removed  from 

unaided human judgment  in real -world 

conditions,  wh ere judges are  typically 

presented with  a much noisier set of 

inputs, including police reports, victim 

impact statements and non -structured 

clinical assessments. 

Observational studies , too,  reveal mixed 

findings  but  al so help shed light on how 

human judges struggle to process 

information in  their  complex and 

information -imperfect decision setting .

Relat ing  the judges’  releas e rates to the 

AI -predicted crime rate,  Kleinberg et al. 

(2018)  find an interesting pattern.  The 

curve relating the two rates is non -linear .

It flattens out as predicted risk 

increases. Judges release defendants 

with a 75% crime risk at nearly the same 

rate as defendants with a 48% crime risk. 

Stricter judges do not prioritize high risk 

defendants. Nor do they follow a

consistent risk threshol d. Instead, 

stricter judges jail additional defendants 

drawn from throughout the predicted 

crime risk distribution.  This suggests that 

automated risk assessment tools may 

improve  on human decisions through 

greater consistency. Simulating 

outcomes under the release 

recommendations of their machine 

learning algorithm, the authors 

demonstrate potential  of up to 24.7% 

reduction in the crime rate,  and  up to 

41.9 % in the incarceration rate. 

Moreover, the algorithm can achieve 

these simulated gains while 

simultaneously reducing racial 

disparities.  These gains are also robust 

to accounting for potential omitted pay -

off bias  associated with the employment 

or marital status of defendants. 

Interestingly, a model trained to predict 

the judges’ decisions rather than flight 

risk or recidivism still does better at 

reducing crime than the judges 

themselves, suggesting that judges give 

excessive  weight to highly salient 

interpersonal cues over more 

info rmative factors such as past 

behaviour  (Kleinberg et al., 2018, p. 287) .

Using the same dataset  but relaxing 

assumptions about the judges’ 

unobserved  utility function , Rambachan 

(2024)  find s that replacing judges where 

systematic mistakes occur with the 

decision rule of an  ensemble model 

(averaging an elastic net model and a 

random forest model)  dominates 

decision making by humans alone. 

Results , however,  are more ambiguous 

(i.e. depend on assumptions about 

policy preferences)  when  all human 

decisions are replaced by the 

algorithm’s recommendations.  Using a 

structural model, it is estimated that  at 

least 20% of judges make systematic 

predictive mistakes about misconduct 

risk. 

Ben -Michael et al.  (2025)  compare 

human -alone to PSA  recommendations 

and find  the latter to have  higher 

misclassification  and false positive rates 

for  recidivism than human judges ,

suggest ing  that the algorithm is 

unnecessarily harsher in impos ing cash 

bails .

From  their  more  tentative  simulation ,

Stevenson & Doleac  (2024)  suggest  that systematically  following the diversion 

recommendations  of the algorithm 

introduced in Virginia  would ha ve  led to 

shorter sentence length and lower 

incarceration rates  at the price of  slightly 

higher recidivism  – an outcome  in line 

with  the main  obje ctive  (namely, 

reducing incarceration rates for low risk 

individuals)  of the legislature when 

introducing automated risk assessment .

4.3.  Summary 

Comparing  human judges to AI 

algorithms is no easy feat.  Experimental 

studies seek to hold prediction tasks 

(and prediction inputs) constant across 

AI and human decision makers, but, in 

doing so, fail to make the comparison 

realistic. Observational studies compare 

AI to realistic conditions, but struggle to 

isol ate the quantity of interest  for valid 

comparison . Moreover, where 

researchers credibly address these 

challenges, e mpirical results may  reflect 

the intrinsic performance of the 

particular  risk assessment instr ument 

tool being evaluated  (PSA, advanced 

machine learning model) .

While  more research would help 

compare  and evaluate  a broader array of 

existing tools , th e studies discussed in 

this Section  nonetheless contribute new 

insights  and suggestive evidence  into 

how human judges  grapple with noisy 

informatio n and  struggle to maintain 

consistency  across case s.

5.  Human -Machine Interactions 

Does the availability of AI tools 

measurably impact judicial decisions? 

Ideally, man and machine ought to 

complement each other, leveraging their 

respective strengths while mutually 

correcting their blind spots. However, 

optimal use cannot be guaranteed. 

Judges may systematically distrust AI 

recommendations. Or, on the contrary, 

judges may  be susceptible to the 

automation bias , overly relying on 

automated advice and igno ring  other 

relevant sources of information 

(Goddard et al., 2012; Parasuraman & 

Manzey, 2010) .

5.1.  Methodologies 

Similar to  AI -versus -Human  research, 

studies investigating  AI -plus -Human 

interactions are a mixture of lab 

experiments  and observational 

analyses . Lab studies compare  the 

recidivism predictions of  a grou p

provided  with  AI risk assessment  to 

those of  a control  (Green & Chen, 2019; 

Grgić -Hlača et al., 2019) . Observational 

studies  typically examine  pre - and post -

implementation  outcomes, some  using 

propensity score matching , regression 

discontinuity or event study designs 

(Lawson et al.,  2024; Lowder et al., 2021; 

Stevenson & Doleac, 2024; Viljoen et al., 

2019) . Drawing on  Kleinberg et al.  (2018) ,

Angelova et al.  (2025)  investigate 

instances of human override  by 

exploit ing  random  case assignment  and 

train ing  machine learning model s to 

predict the judges’ own decisions. 

Meanwhile,  Ben -Michael et al.  (2025) 

and  (Imai et al., 2023)  report the results 

of  what is, to date,  the  first  field 

randomized controlled  trial  (RCT)  testing 

the impact of  AI risk assessments on 

judicial decisions .

5.2.  Empirical Findings 

Lab studies  have  found  a modest effect 

of algorithmic recommendations  on  the 

predictions of  human participants. 

Grgić -Hlača et al.  (2019)  report that 

participant s change d their predicti ons 

when presented with  algorithmic advice 

in 7% of  cases . Green & Chen  (2019)  find 

that  participants provided with 

algorithmic  recommendation  make more accurate predictions than the 

control group  while  still  significantly 

under perform ing  the  algorithm . The 

same study found that , while reducing 

false positive  rates for both black and 

white defendants , exposure to 

algorithmic advice  had  disparate racial 

impact for high risk defendants. 

In a systematic review and meta -analysis 

of  observational  22  studies,  Viljoen et al. 

(2019)  report  small reductions in 

incarcerations  (aggregated odd s ratio 

[OR ] = 0.63,  p < 0 .001 ) and recidivism 

rates ( OR  = 0.85,  p < 0.02) . But w ith more 

than half of studies presenting  serious 

risk of bias, the  overall strength of this 

evidence  must be regarded as  low. 

Likewise,  Lawson et al.  (2024)  find little 

evidence of disparate impact  on race 

and ethnicity  in  their systematic  review 

of 21 articles but deplore the  scarcity of 

high quality studies. 

Based on a proven and rigorous research 

design , analyses of the  first RCT  report a 

null result  (Ben -Michael et al., 2025; Imai 

et al., 2023) . J udg es  in the treatment 

group  follow  PSA recommendations 70% 

of the time . But  false negative and false 

positive rates  for  reoffence  show no 

significant difference  with  the  control 

group.  These r esults  hold across  gender 

and  race. 

Ben -Michael et al. (2025) , Stevenson & 

Doleac (2024) and Angelova et al.  (2025) 

all report  high incidence of human 

override of AI recommendations .

Isolating the reasons  that  spur judges to 

do so  is a question  attracting increasing 

attention  in recent research . In the 

sentencing context,  Stevenson & Doleac 

(2024)  find  age,  marital status, 

employment and  race  to be all robust 

predictors of  deviations from  algorithmic 

advice.  Unlike  the  other  predictors , all 

correlate d with  more lenient sentencing, 

race correlates wi th longer sentences  for 

black convicts , which suggests that 

deviations may be induced by  human 

bias.  Angelova et al.  (2025)  find that  a

subset of  judges  outperform algorithmic 

recommendations . To  isolate what  could 

explain the performance differential, the 

researchers collect additional data from 

the case reports , includ ing  information 

on  race, residence  (homelessness , out -

of -state address) , aggravating 

cir cumstances and  recommendation 

from a pretrial officer.  A machine 

learning model trained with  this 

additional  information  better predict the 

decisions of the  outperforming judges 

but  results in worse predictive 

performance for the decisions of the 

underperforming judges . Outperforming 

judges are  significantly  less likely to 

release  defendants with aggravating 

conditions  and  violent charge against an 

adult . Under performing judges are 

significantly  more likely to jail 

defendants with an out -of -state address, 

despite th is factor not being particularly 

predictive of pretrial misconduct.  While 

the sample of judges  included in the 

study  is small  (62) , this provide s

suggestive evidence that  outperforming 

judges might be systematically better at 

picking relevant signals from additional 

information. 

5.3.  Summary 

Research  investigating  the impact of 

decision aid systems in the legal field is 

still in its infancy . For supporters and 

critics of algorithmic risk assessment, 

existing  human -in -the -loop studies  offer 

both  comforting and disappointing 

takeaways. First,  the impact of  risk 

assessment instruments appear  to be, at 

most, very modest . The fact that the first 

field  RCT , reasonably  powered  (sample 

size  N = 18 91 , incidence close to 30% for 

the main outcome variables ), produced 

a null result  implies that the te chnology is far from having a transformative 

impact on criminal justice.  Second, 

available  empirical evidence  does not 

suggest over -reliance , or judges  treat ing 

automated systems as cognitive 

shortcuts.  More  longitudinal studies are 

certainly needed to assess  temporal 

shifts in human override behaviour. But 

Stevenson & Doleac  (2024)  report 

evidence of  a decrease rather than an 

increase in  the impact of automated 

recommendations over time. This should 

assuage fears , notably in legal circles, 

that the technology  is causing 

automation bias  (Romeo & Conti, 2025; 

Ruschemeier & Hondrich, 2024) .

As high -quality studies  have only 

considered  the impact of  a few risk 

assessment tools  in  a small set of 

(overwhelmingly  US)  settings , there is 

certainly room  for future research  to 

refine , if not revise, these  general 

findings. 

Tentative attempts to isolate the effects 

of  individual characteristics  and  relevant 

or irrelevant informational cues  on 

overrides  point  to  important  areas for 

future research  across the fields of 

judicial behaviour and  AI -plus -Human 

interactions.  According to r esearch on 

the automation bias  (Goddard et al., 

2012) , human responses to decision aid 

systems are  moderated by workload as 

well as individual cognitive styles . Th ere 

are potentially  important connections 

between this research programme and 

older work on  heuristics review ed  in 

Section 3 .2.  Cross -individual variations 

may  reflect differences  in  the  heuristics 

judges employ to simpl ify their decision 

making  environment . Given the 

respective limitations of  lab and real -

world settings, s ignificant a dvance s will 

necessitate  a combination of lab 

experiments, survey work (to measure 

cognitive  styles ), simulations, 

observational  analysis  and,  when 

possible , field RCTs. 

6.  Conclusion 

Using  criminal justice risk assessment 

as a focal point, we  have tried to  connect 

three questions  central  to the 

introduction of AI technolog ies in the 

judiciary , canvass ing  their respective 

literatures , evaluating the state of  the art 

and suggesting  avenues for  future 

investigation.  AI impact cannot be 

assessed without consider ing  and 

comparing  the technology it self, the 

weaknesses of human judges , an d the 

interaction of the two .

As our  review  shows , t he disciplines of 

economics, psychology, criminology, 

law and computer science have made 

substantial  progress  in investigating 

these questions, at least when 

considered separately.  However, 

important gaps  remain. 

While the impact o f AI decision aid tools 

on pretrial and sentencing outcomes 

currently  appears less impressive than 

some  may have hoped and less 

damaging  th an some may have feared, 

limitations of  existing work  mean that 

future  research may add refinements ,

nuances  or even produce outright 

revision s of  this conclusion . Many 

aspects of the three connected 

questions  remain poorly or imperfectly 

understood.  Are  existing risk 

assessment  aid system s insufficiently 

calibrated or accurate  to improve on 

humans?  Could  tweaked versions of 

these systems (e.g. using advanced 

machine learning)  ameliorate the 

outcome of automation?  What 

comparative advantage do human 

judges retain  over automated risk 

assessment systems?  How do individual 

judges differ in their ability  to use 

decision aid  systems efficiently? As  our review underlines, some  of these 

aspects  are  difficult to investigate. 

Comparing judges and algorithms  has 

proved methodologically challenging . So 

has  investigation of the role of individual 

characteristics in moderating the impact 

of AI technology.  Going forward, 

progress, we argued, might  require a 

more integra ted methodological 

approach. 

References 

Abrams, D. S., Bertrand, M., & Mullainathan, 

S. (2012). Do Judges Vary in Their 

Treatment of Race?  The Journal of 

Legal Studies , 41 (2), 347 –383. 

https://doi.org/10.1086/666006 

Angelova, V., Dobbie, W., & Yang, C. S. 

(2025). Algorithmic 

Recommendations and Human 

Discretion.  The Review of Economic 

Studies , rdaf084. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/restud/rdaf 

084 

Ash, E., Asher, S., Bhowmick, A., 

Bhupatiraju, S., Chen, D., Devi, T., 

Goessmann, C., Novosad, P., &

Siddiqi, B. (2025). In -group bias in the 

Indian judiciary: Evidence from 5

million criminal cases.  Review of 

Economics and Statistics , 1 –45. 

Ash, E., & MacLeod, W. B. (2015). Intrinsic 

motivation in public service: Theory 

and evidence from state supreme 

courts.  The Journal of Law and 

Economics , 58 (4), Article 4. 

Ashley, K. D. (2017).  Artificial Intelligence 

and Legal Analytics: New Tools for 

Law Practice in the Digital Age .

Cambridge University Press. 

Beebe, B. (2006). An empirical study of the 

multifactor tests for trademark 

infringement.  Calif. L. Rev. , 94 , 1581. 

Beebe, B. (2007). An empirical study of US 

copyright fair use opinions, 1978 -

2005.  U. Pa. L. Rev. , 156 , 549. 

Beebe, B. (2020). An Empirical Study of U.S. 

Copyright Fair Use Opinions 

Updated, 1978 -2019.  New York 

University Journal of Intellectual 

Property & Entertainment Law 

(JIPEL) , 10 (1), 1 –39. 

Ben -Michael, E., Greiner, D. J., Huang, M., 

Imai, K., Jiang, Z., & Shin, S. (2025). 

Does AI help humans make better 

decisions? A statistical evaluation 

framework for experimental and 

observational studies.  Proceedings 

of the National Academy of 

Sciences , 122 (38), e2505106122. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.25051 

06122 

Berk, R. (2017). An impact assessment of 

machine learning risk forecasts on 

parole board decisions and 

recidivism.  Journal of Experimental 

Criminology , 13 (2), 193 –216. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11292 -

017 -9286 -2

Biswas, A., Kolczynska, M., Rantanen, S., & 

Rozenshtein, P. (2020). The Role of 

In -Group Bias and Balanced Data: A 

Comparison of Human and Machine 

Recidivism Risk Predictions. 

Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGCAS 

Conference on Computing and 

Sustainable Societies, COMPASS 

’20 , 97 –104. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3378393.34 

02507 

Bonica, A., & Sen, M. (2021). Estimating 

Judicial Ideology.  Journal of 

Economic Perspectives , 35 (1), 97 –

118. 

https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.35.1.97 

Bontrager, S., Barrick, K., & Stupi, E. (2013). 

Gender and sentencing: A meta -

analysis of contemporary research. 

J. Gender Race & Just. , 16 , 349. 

Braman, E., & Nelson, T. E. (2007). 

Mechanism of Motivated Reasoning? 

Analogical Perception in 

Discrimination Disputes.  American 

Journal of Political Science , 51 (4), 

Article 4. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.11 

11/j.1540 -5907.2007.00290.x 

Breiman, L. (2001). Random Forests. 

Machine Learning , 45 (1), 5–32. 

https://doi.org/10.1023/A:10109334 

04324 

Bushway, S. D., Owens, E. G., & Piehl, A. M. 

(2012). Sentencing Guidelines and 

Judicial Discretion: Quasi -

Experimental Evidence from Human 

Calculation Errors.  Journal of 

Empirical Legal Studies , 9(2), 291 –

319. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1740 -

1461.2012.01254.x 

Bystranowski, P., Janik, B., Próchnicki, M., & 

Skórska, P. (2021). Anchoring effect 

in legal decision -making: A meta -

analysis.  Law and Human Behavior ,

45 (1), Article 1. 

Casper, J. D., Benedict, K., & Perry, J. L. 

(1989). Juror decision making, 

attitudes, and the hindsight bias. 

Law and Human Behavior , 13 (3), 

291 –310. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/BF0106703 

1

Chen, D., Moskowitz, T. J., & Shue, K. (2016). 

Decision -Making Under the 

Gambler’s Fallacy: Evidence from 

Asylum Judges, Loan Officers, and 

Baseball Umpires.  The Quarterly 

Journal of Economics , qjw017. 

Choi, D. D., Harris, J. A., & Shen -Bayh, F. 

(2022). Ethnic Bias in Judicial 

Decision Making: Evidence from 

Criminal Appeals in Kenya.  American 

Political Science Review , 116 (3), 

1067 –1080. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/S00030554 

2100143X 

Cohen, A., & Yang, C. S. (2019). Judicial 

Politics and Sentencing Decisions. 

American Economic Journal: 

Economic Policy , 11 (1), 160 –191. 

https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.201703 

29 

Desmarais, S. L., Zottola, S. A., Duhart 

Clarke, S. E., & Lowder, E. M. (2021). 

Predictive Validity of Pretrial Risk 

Assessments: A Systematic Review 

of the Literature.  Criminal Justice 

and Behavior , 48 (4), 398 –420. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0093854820 

932959 

Dhami, M. K. (2003). Psychological Models 

of Professional Decision Making. 

Psychological Science , 14 (2), 175 –

180. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467 -

9280.01438 

Dhami, M. K., & Ayton, P. (2001).  Bailing and 

jailing the fast and frugal way.  Journal 

of Behavioral Decision Making , 14 (2), 

141 –168. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/bdm.371 

Dressel, J., & Farid, H. (2018). The accuracy, 

fairness, and limits of predicting 

recidivism.  Science Advances , 4(1), 

eaao5580. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aao5 

580 

Duwe, G., & Kim, K. (2017). Out With the Old 

and in With the New? An Empirical 

Comparison of Supervised Learning 

Algorithms to Predict Recidivism. 

Criminal Justice Policy Review , 28 (6), 

570 –600. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0887403415 

604899 

Dyevre, A., & Rodilla Lazaro, A. (2025). 

Ideological Polarization on 

Constitutional Courts: Evidence 

from Spain.  Available at SSRN 

5124478 .

https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/paper 

s.cfm?abstract_id=5124478 

Ebbesen, E. B., & Konecni, V. J. (1975). 

Decision making and information 

integration in the courts: The setting 

of bail.  Journal of Personality and 

Social Psychology , 32 (5), 805. 

Eisenberg, T., & Miller, G. P. (2004). Attorney 

Fees in Class Action Settlements: An 

Empirical Study.  Journal of Empirical 

Legal Studies , 1(1), 27 –78. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1740 -

1461.2004.00002.x 

Engel, C., Linhardt, L., & Schubert, M. (2025). 

Code is law: How COMPAS affects 

the way the judiciary handles the risk 

of recidivism.  Artificial Intelligence 

and Law , 33 (2), 383 –404. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10506 -

024 -09389 -8Englich, B., Mussweiler, T., & Strack, F. 

(2006). Playing Dice With Criminal 

Sentences: The Influence of 

Irrelevant Anchors on Experts’ 

Judicial Decision Making.  Personality 

and Social Psychology Bulletin ,

32 (2), 188 –200. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0146167205 

282152 

Epstein, L., Landes, W. M., & Posner, R. A. 

(2013).  The Behavior of Federal 

Judges: A Theoretical and Empirical 

Study of Rational Choice . Harvard 

University Press. 

Fazel, S., Burghart, M., Fanshawe, T., Gil, S. 

D., Monahan, J., & Yu, R. (2022). The 

predictive performance of criminal 

risk assessment tools used at 

sentencing: Systematic review of 

validation studies.  Journal of 

Criminal Justice , 81 , 101902. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcrimjus.2 

022.101902 

Fessel, F., & Roese, N. J. (2011). Hindsight 

Bias, Visual Aids, and Legal Decision 

Making: Timing is Everything.  Social 

and Personality Psychology 

Compass , 5(4), Article 4. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751 -

9004.2011.00343.x 

Ghasemi, M., Anvari, D., Atapour, M., 

Stephen wormith, J., Stockdale, K. 

C., & Spiteri, R. J. (2021). The 

Application of Machine Learning to a 

General Risk –Need Assessment 

Instrument in the Prediction of 

Criminal Recidivism.  Criminal 

Justice and Behavior , 48 (4), 518 –538. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0093854820 

969753 

Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M., & Group, A. R. 

(2000).  Simple Heuristics that Make 

Us Smart . Oxford University Press. 

Goddard, K., Roudsari, A., & Wyatt, J. C. 

(2012). Automation bias: A

systematic review of frequency, 

effect mediators, and mitigators. 

Journal of the American Medical 

Informatics Association , 19 (1), 121 –

127. 

https://doi.org/10.1136/amiajnl -

2011 -000089 

Goel, S., Shroff, R., Skeem, J., & Slobogin, C. 

(2021).  The accuracy, equity, and 

jurisprudence of criminal risk 

assessment. In  Research handbook 

on big data law  (pp. 9 –28). Edward 

Elgar Publishing. 

https://www.elgaronline.com/abstr 

act/edcoll/9781788972819/978178 

8972819.00007.xml 

Green, B., & Chen, Y. (2019). Disparate 

Interactions: An Algorithm -in -the -

Loop Analysis of Fairness in Risk 

Assessments.  Proceedings of the 

Conference on Fairness, 

Accountability, and Transparency, 

FAT* ’19 , 90 –99. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3287560.32 

87563 

Grgić -Hlača, N., Engel, C., & Gummadi, K. P. 

(2019). Human Decision Making with 

Machine Assistance: An Experiment 

on Bailing and Jailing.  Proceedings of 

the ACM on Human -Computer 

Interaction , 3(CSCW), 1–25. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3359280 

Gursoy, F., & Kakadiaris, I. A. (2022). Equal 

confusion fairness: Measuring 

group -based disparities in 

automated decision systems.  2022 

IEEE International Conference on 

Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW) ,

137 –146. 

https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract 

/document/10029385/?casa_token 

=NtHLg1nhFTwAAAAA:vYxUoW_woo 

VMz8yFOfdYoV75ooU -

iVpZFqz4HjgLdjn5JUn51ej0i_C9Rsn 

ZzEWdN9lKYVtyUwU 

Guthrie, C., Rachlinski, J. J., & Wistrich, A. J. 

(2000).  Inside the judicial mind. 

Cornell L. Rev. , 86 , 777. 

Hangartner, D., Lauderdale, B. E., & Spirig, J. 

(2025). Inferring individual 

preferences from group decisions: 

Judicial preference variation and 

aggregation on collegial courts. 

British Journal of Political Science ,

55 , e163. 

Hardt, M., Price, E., & Srebro, N. (2016). 

Equality of Opportunity in Supervised 

Learning  (arXiv:1610.02413). arXiv. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1610 

.02413 

Harley, E. M. (2007). Hindsight Bias In Legal 

Decision Making.  Social Cognition ,

25 (1), 48 –63. 

https://doi.org/10.1521/soco.2007. 

25.1.48 

Hellman, D. (2025). Algorithmic Fairness. In 

E. N. Zalta & U. Nodelman (Eds.),  The 

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 

(Fall 2025). Metaphysics Research 

Lab, Stanford University. 

https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/ 

fall2025/entries/algorithmic -

fairness/ 

Hernández -Orallo, J., Flach, P., & Ferri, C. 

(2012). A unified view of performance 

metrics: Translating threshold 

choice into expected classification 

loss.  J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 13 (1), 

2813 –2869. 

Himmelstein, M., Atanasov, P., & Budescu, 

D. V. (2021). Forecasting forecaster 

accuracy: Contributions of past 

performance and individual 

differences.  Judgment and Decision 

Making , 16 (2), 323 –362. 

https://doi.org/10.1017/S19302975 

00008597 

Huang, B. I. (2010). Lightened Scrutiny. 

Harvard Law Review , 124 , 1109 –

1152. 

Imai, K., Jiang, Z., Greiner, D. J., Halen, R., & 

Shin, S. (2023).  Experimental 

evaluation of algorithm -assisted 

human decision -making: Application 

to pretrial public safety 

assessment*.  Journal of the Royal 

Statistical Society Series A: Statistics 

in Society , 186 (2), 167 –189. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/jrsssa/qnad 

010 

Jung, J., Concannon, C., Shroff, R., Goel, S., 

& Goldstein, D. G. (2017).  Simple 

rules for complex decisions 

(arXiv:1702.04690). arXiv. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1702 

.04690 

Kahneman, D. (2011).  Thinking, Fast and 

Slow . Penguin UK. 

Kamiran, F., & Calders, T. (2012).  Data 

preprocessing techniques for 

classification without 

discrimination.  Knowledge and 

Information Systems , 33 (1), 1–33. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10115 -

011 -0463 -8

Kehl, D., & Kessler, S. (2017).  Algorithms in 

the criminal justice system: 

Assessing the use of risk 

assessments in sentencing .

https://dash.harvard.edu/entities/p 

ublication/73120379 -010a -6bd4 -

e053 -0100007fdf3b 

Kleinberg, J., Lakkaraju, H., Leskovec, J., 

Ludwig, J., & Mullainathan, S. (2018). 

Human decisions and machine 

predictions.  The Quarterly Journal of 

Economics , 133 (1), Article 1. 

Kukucka, J., & Kassin, S. M. (2014). Do 

confessions taint perceptions of 

handwriting evidence? An empirical 

test of the forensic confirmation 

bias.  Law and Human Behavior ,

38 (3), Article 3. 

https://doi.org/10.1037/lhb0000066 

Lagioia, F., Rovatti, R., & Sartor, G. (2023). 

Algorithmic fairness through group 

parities? The case of COMPAS -

SAPMOC.  AI & SOCIETY , 38 (2), 459 –

478. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146 -

022 -01441 -y

Lakkaraju, H., Kleinberg, J., Leskovec, J., 

Ludwig, J., & Mullainathan, S. (2017). 

The Selective Labels Problem: 

Evaluating Algorithmic Predictions in 

the Presence of Unobservables. 

Proceedings of the 23rd ACM 

SIGKDD International Conference on 

Knowledge Discovery and Data 

Mining, KDD ’17 , 275 –284. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3097983.30 

98066 

Lawson, S. G., Narkewicz, E. L., & Vincent, G. 

M. (2024). Disparate impact of risk 

assessment instruments: A

systematic review.  Law and Human 

Behavior , 48 (5 –6), 427 –440. 

https://doi.org/10.1037/lhb0000582 

Levinson, J. D., Bennett, M. W., & Hioki, K. 

(2017). Judging Implicit Bias: A

National Empirical Study of Judicial Sterotypes.  Florida Law Review ,

69 (1), 63 –114. 

Lin, Z. “Jerry,” Jung, J., Goel, S., & Skeem, J. 

(2020). The limits of human 

predictions of recidivism.  Science 

Advances , 6(7), eaaz0652. 

https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aaz0 

652 

Lowder, E. M., Diaz, C. L., Grommon, E., & 

Ray, B. R. (2021). Effects of pretrial 

risk assessments on release 

decisions and misconduct 

outcomes relative to practice as 

usual.  Journal of Criminal Justice , 73 ,

101754. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcrimjus.2 

020.101754 

Lu, W., & Chen, D. L. (2025). Motivated 

reasoning in the field: Polarization of 

prose, precedent, and policy in US 

Circuit Courts, 1891 –2013.  Plos 

One , 20 (3), e0318790. 

Niblett, A. (2024). Artificial Intelligence and 

Judging. In L. Epstein, G. Grendstad, 

U. Šadl, & K. Weinshall (Eds.),  The 

Oxford Handbook of Comparative 

Judicial Behaviour  (p. 0). Oxford 

University Press. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/97 

80192898579.013.46 

O’Brien, B. (2009). Prime suspect: An 

examination of factors that 

aggravate and counteract 

confirmation bias in criminal 

investigations.  Psychology, Public 

Policy, and Law , 15 (4), Article 4. 

https://doi.org/10.1037/a0017881 

Parasuraman, R., & Manzey, D. (2010). 

Complacency and Bias in Human 

Use of Automation: An Attentional 

Integration.  Human Factors , 52 ,

381 –410. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720810 

376055 

Philippe, A. (2020). Gender Disparities in 

Sentencing.  Economica , 87 (348), 

1037 –1077. 

https://doi.org/10.1111/ecca.12333 

Pinello, D. R. (1999). Linking Party to Judicial 

Ideology in American Courts: A Meta -

analysis.  The Justice System Journal ,

20 (3), 219 –254. 

Rachlinski, J. J., Johnson, S. L., Wistrich, A. J., 

& Guthrie, C. (2008). Does 

Unconscious Racial Bias Affect Trial 

Judges.  Notre Dame Law Review ,

84 (3), 1195 –1246. 

Rachlinski, J. J., & Wistrich, A. J. (2017). 

Judging the Judiciary by the 

Numbers: Empirical Research on 

Judges.  Annual Review of Law and 

Social Science , 13 (1), 203 –229. 

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -

lawsocsci -110615 -085032 

Rachlinski, J. J., & Wistrich, A. J. (2021). 

Benevolent sexism in judges.  San 

Diego L. Rev. , 58 , 101. 

Rachlinski, J. J., Wistrich, A. J., & Guthrie, C. 

(2012).  Altering attention in 

adjudication.  UCLA L. Rev. , 60 , 1586. 

Rachlinski, J. J., Wistrich, A. J., & Guthrie, C. 

(2015).  Can judges make reliable 

numeric judgments: Distorted 

damages and skewed sentences. 

Ind. LJ , 90 , 695. 

Rambachan, A. (2024). Identifying Prediction 

Mistakes in Observational Data*.  The 

Quarterly Journal of Economics ,

139 (3), 1665 –1711. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjae013 

Ramji -Nogales, J., Schoenholtz, A. I., &

Schrag, P. G. (2007).  Refugee 

roulette: Disparities in asylum 

adjudication.  Stan. L. Rev. , 60 , 295. 

Rieskamp, J., & Hoffrage, U. (1999).  When do 

people use simple heuristics, and 

how can we tell.  Simple Heuristics 

That Make Us Smart , 141 –167. 

Romeo, G., & Conti, D. (2025). Exploring 

automation bias in human –AI 

collaboration: A review and 

implications for explainable AI.  AI & 

SOCIETY .

https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146 -

025 -02422 -7

Rudin, C., Wang, C., & Coker, B. (2020). The 

Age of Secrecy and Unfairness in 

Recidivism Prediction.  Harvard Data 

Science Review , 2(1). 

http://hdsr.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/7z 

10o269/release/3 

Ruschemeier, H., & Hondrich, L. J. (2024). 

Automation bias in public 

administration  – an interdisciplinary perspective from law and 

psychology.  Government 

Information Quarterly , 41 (3), 

101953. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2024.1 

01953 

Salo, B., Laaksonen, T., & Santtila, P. (2019). 

Predictive Power of Dynamic (vs. 

Static) Risk Factors in the Finnish 

Risk and Needs Assessment Form. 

Criminal Justice and Behavior , 46 (7), 

939 –960. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0093854819 

848793 

Shumway, C., & Wilson, R. (2022). 

Workplace disruptions, judge 

caseloads, and judge decisions: 

Evidence from SSA judicial corps 

retirements.  Journal of Public 

Economics , 205 , 104573. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2 

021.104573 

Skeem, J., Monahan, J., & Lowenkamp, C. 

(2016). Gender, risk assessment, 

and sanctioning: The cost of treating 

women like men.  Law and Human 

Behavior , 40 (5), 580. 

Starr, S. B. (2015). Estimating Gender 

Disparities in Federal Criminal 

Cases.  American Law and 

Economics Review , 17 (1), 127 –159. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/aler/ahu010 

Stephen Wormith, J., & Bonta, J. (2018). The 

Level of Service (LS) Instruments. In 

Handbook of Recidivism Risk/Needs 

Assessment Tools  (pp. 117 –145). 

John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119184 

256.ch6 

Stevenson, M. T., & Doleac, J. L. (2024). 

Algorithmic Risk Assessment in the 

Hands of Humans.  American 

Economic Journal: Economic Policy ,

16 (4), 382 –414. 

https://doi.org/10.1257/pol.202206 

20 

Sunstein, C. R., Schkade, D., Ellman, L. M., & 

Sawicki, A. (2007).  Are judges 

political? An empirical analysis of the 

federal judiciary . Rowman &

Littlefield. 

Viljoen, J. L., Jonnson, M. R., Cochrane, D. 

M., Vargen, L. M., & Vincent, G. M. 

(2019).  Impact of risk assessment 

instruments on rates of pretrial 

detention, postconviction 

placements, and release: A

systematic review and meta -

analysis.  Law and Human Behavior ,

43 (5), 397. 

Vlek, C. S., Prakken, H., Renooij, S., &

Verheij, B. (2016). A method for 

explaining Bayesian networks for 

legal evidence with scenarios. 

Artificial Intelligence and Law , 24 (3), 

285 –324. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10506 -

016 -9183 -4

Wistrich, A. J., & Rachlinski, J. J. (2012). How 

Lawyers’ Intuitions Prolong Litigation 

Modeling Human Decisionmaking in 

the Law Symposium.  Southern 

California Law Review , 86 (3), 571 –

636. 

Zafar, M. B., Valera, I., Gomez Rodriguez, M., 

& Gummadi, K. P. (2017). Fairness 

Beyond Disparate Treatment &

Disparate Impact: Learning 

Classification without Disparate 

Mistreatment.  Proceedings of the 

26th International Conference on 

World Wide Web , 1171 –1180. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3038912.30 

52660